You might be wondering why Butter matters so much. Not the calories, not the fat, but specificly butter. The shortest awnser is the flavor and smell. The longer awnser is an combination of evolutions lazy tinker nature, and completely reasonable individual actions that combine into a biochemical joke told over tens of thousands of years.

Long ago, when both our and your ancestors looked and acted like nocternal shrews, ours ran into a problem.

This problem is that because of the same genetic and chemical locks we still have, an infant requires _three_ parent like figures to survive and thrive: A ovum suplier who had functioning overies. Someone to suplie the sperm to firilize those eggs, and someone to nurse the young pups. This was usually possible to do thanks to our (for something less than a foot long) long life spans and complex social groups, but difficult and risky.

Alternitherians mamals can just miscary if their own diet isn't good enough, but because our young mothers had to entrust their infants to either their mates or their mothers, evolution quickly hit on a solution. If durring (the equivalent to) the second trimester, you don't smell milk fat, miscarry.

That gave enough time for their mother or partner to start smelling like milk, but also allowed them to cut off pregnancies that had started durring good times but would be delivering the pup into starvation, and delaying their mother's growth by weeks.

So it is near universal among Alternitherians for lack of Triglyceride Butyric acid in their diet (or at least in their environment) to cause a miscarige, its not a "nutrient" like vitiman c (needed by primates), or taurine (needed by both us and true felines).

In the wild this worked fine. Its in milk and not much else, sure its concentration rises slightly as milk dries or is frothed, but that doesn't matter, right? Its not like anyone is going to intentionally churn milk, right?

Only, well, sapients try everything when it comes to food. So every single one of our cultures learned to make butter, from our domesticated animals if we had them, from our adults if we didn't. And then realized, wow, if we give this too our bearing age girls, they almost never miscary, even when food is hard!

And this started a bit of an arms race, see elders and sires don't want their mates and daughters to miscary, even if they might not be able to provide enough milk to the infant. Sure its risky, but so is letting their cohort of bearers maybe age out of producing infants at all! And well, miscarige is emotionally devistating to the young women who have to go through it. The evolutionary reasoning is selfish, the personal reasoning is caring.

But this sets up an arms race. Almost like only giving schools that pass a test funding, bearers' biochemistry is pressuring their mates and fathers to cheat. But the easist way to deal with the cheating is just factor it into how much Butyric acid you need. And so.. in modern catgirl populations we require something like 10 times as much butyric acid (and compounds) to prevent miscarige then a standard Alternitherian of our size.

And that leads to us putting butter in our colone, and our food, and hoarding those little sticks of butter that resturants give out. If you are around an male presenting cat girl and she smells like butter? I guarantie that they are trying to get laid.